Hi,

in our local wireless community network we would like to properly deploy IPv6 on
top of a layer 3 routing protocol such as OLSRv2, babel, etc..

We spent some time reflecting on how to achieve our goal. I would like
to share our thoughts with you and would like to ask you for your feedback.

Our main goal is to have one ore more public IPv6 prefixes in the mesh network.
The problem domain can be split in two larger problems:

1) How do we distribute the ipv6 public prefix from a gateway node to nodes in
the network? The problem here is that we can't just use DHCPv6 or NDP because we
don't have one big layer-2-network.

2) How do we guarantee that packets with a specific source address get routed
via the gateway the address originated from? The problem is that a gateway or
upstream ISP would possibly drop outbound packages that do not have a src ip
from the gateway prefix. This makes sense to mitigate e.g. DDoS attacks based
on source address spoofing.

To my knowledge, the later problem is solved by source specific routing
implemented in layer 3 routing daemons such as OLSRv2 or babel(s).

The proper distribution/delegation of IPv6 prefixes still remains a problem.

I suggest that we use a combination of IPv6 prefix delegation and DHCPv6 relays
to delegate prefixes from the gateway to the nodes (and clients of the node).

I assume that we can establish basic connectivity between nodes in the mesh
network by using ULA prefixes [1] and a routing daemon that uses these
addresses for establishing a mesh network.

A gateway that has a prefix to delegate starts a DHCPv6 server. The server is
reachable by other nodes via the ULA address [1]. In addition, the server can be
reached by other nodes via a public IPv6 address that is part of the prefix.

A gateway that wants to delegate prefixes announces the prefix to the other
nodes (think of HNAs or local attached networks).

A node that wants to use one or more prefixes gets a list of available prefixes
and the responsible gateway ips through the routing daemon. The node can use the
gateway ips to configure a list of destination addresses for its local DHCPv6
relay. [2]

A node that wants to request a prefix for local delegation can send a prefix
delegation request to the local DHCPv6 relay. The relay will forward the
delegation request via unicast/multicast to gateways/DHCPv6 servers responsible
for a prefix.

Once a node received a prefix, the prefix can be destributed to clients e.g. via
NDP/SLAAC (stateless auto address configuration).

A node that received a prefix announces the prefix in the layer 3 mesh. The node
and all clients will be reachable through the announced prefix.

A node will only ask gateways for a prefix if they announce a default route
(::/0).

To reduce complexity of the setup we could also push for an extension of the
dhcpv6 client behaivour as described in section 18.1 of the DHCPv6 RFC [3].
This would make the relay agent on the node obsolete because the node can
send a DHCPv6 client request directly to the server on the gateway.

We will try to implement this idea in the next month in a test bed. Before we
start to implement the idea we would love to get some feedback from you.

Best Philipp

[1] https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4193
[2] https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3315#section-20
[3] https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3315#section-18.1
